>> Kyle Simpson: So let's talk about
recursion in the practical sense.
We can get a sense of
the theoretical way that this works.
But in the practical sense many of you
probably know that recursion often doesn't
make its way into production applications
for one particularly sticky reason.
Which is that range error that we get
thrown whenever recursion has been running
for too long and we get a range error
thrown, stack overflow exceeded, okay?
That's the major problem that I think,
for the last 50 or 60 years,
has essentially limited the utility
of recursion from being a general
programming thing that everybody has
to learn and everybody has to use.
Is because a lot of people basically think
in the back of their mind that sort of
nagging feeling like,
yeah it sounds good in theory, but
in practice it would probably blow up so
I'm not gonna use it.
And so I want to talk about that because
there are ways of addressing this problem.
In theory your computer
could just run forever, and
you'd have infinite memory and
infinite CPU.
But in practice we know
that's not the case, and so
we do need to actually step in.
A little bit ago I said, try not to
think too much from a computer science
perspective about what's
happening in memory.
But to get an intuition for why there
is a practical limitation problem,
we do need to think just a little bit
about the implementation side of it, okay?
I don't want you thinking
about implementation as your
authoring this code.
But it's just to get us a sense of
the problem of the range error,
of the stack overflow problem.
So if we think about when
a function gets called,
when one function is running and
it calls off to another function.
It doesn't have to be it's own function,
it doesn't have to be recursion.
It's just the general problem
that when one function
calls out to another function,
at that moment,
everything that was currently happening in
that function needs to get saved somehow.
So that all the stuff that happens in
the other function doesn't mess up
what was happening in the first one.
So if you are in the middle of function
A and you call off the function B,
you kinda have to have somewhere where
all of A's in-progress work is saved so
that there's some place, a scratch pad if
you will, for the work for B to happen.
And in computer science terms,
we call these stack frames.
Every time a function gets executed,
an area of memory is reserved and
it's called a stack frame.
And we call it a stack frame,
we actually call it a memory frame.
We call it a stack frame because when one
function calls another and then that one
calls another, and that one calls another,
what we have is a stack that's growing.
You have at the bottom level the initial
function that called off to B.
And B called off to C and C called
off to D, you're building up a stack.
And we use the stack data structure
idea because when this final-most,
this top-most function if you will,
finishes running, and
its work is done,
we can get rid of that memory.
And we pop the stack back to the previous
one and it picks up where it left off.
And then we pop the stack
back to the previous one, and
it might call another and
another, and keep coming back.
So we have this stack data structure.
Whether or not the computer actually
uses the stack, conceptually,
it usually a stack to manage all of the
work as it builds up and goes back down,
and builds up and goes back down.
So what kinds of things
are in these stack frames?
Well, you have all of the local
variables that have been assigned,
any memory that's being assigned for
those.
You have the program counter which is
basically what line of code it's on,
or what part of an expression it's on,
or something like that.
So basic things like that, very low-level
things that the computer needs to track
what's happening inside of a function.
And it doesn't take up a lot of memory,
we are not talking about
megabytes worth of memory.
The stack frame is probably like a few
hundred bytes or a K or something.
It's probably like a couple hundred
bytes at most for each stack frame.
And if you're calling a hundred
functions in a chain,
which almost never happens by the way.
Probably at the most you probably go 5,
10 maybe 15 deep.
But if you've called even
100 of those functions and
you've still only used up a fraction of
a megabyte of memory, it's not a big deal.
You never see any sort
of a problem with that.
But as soon as we get into programming
practices like recursion, it becomes
dramatically more likely that that stack
frame, that might grow to thousands,
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands,
millions and even beyond.
And that does start to chew up
some non-trivial amount of memory.
Now, this is not a new thought,
this is not a new occurrence.
Almost the day that recursion was
invented back in the, whatever, 60s,
the very next day, somebody thought,
we only have 4K of RAM on this computer.
[LAUGH] We can't do very many
function calls in 4K of RAM, right?
So back then they had much more
of a pronounced limitation
than we even do with our fancy
gigabytes worth of memory.
They had way less memory, so
this was a very present problem for them.
The math predicted that recursion
was this great way of doing things.
But in practice we're limited by
the amount of memory that we can run.
So, they immediately had to confront,
is recursion something that
should just be filed away as a nice great
theory but not something that can be used?
Or is there some way to address it?